
News in the ozk-enhancements CVS branch
 
10-Jan-2010

WARNING:
 You can not mix binaries from this source-tree with other binaries!

FreeMiNT kernel

 A new module framework is under development. This framework is meant to be
 versatile enough to enable other module frameworks to extend it. One example
 of this is how XaAES's module framework uses the kernel to do most work, still
 allowing it to define own functionality.
 
  NOTE: This is very experimental!
 
 
XaAES kernel

 Modules:
 
  XaAES now use two different kinds of modules. Both kinds of modules
 must be put into a directory called 'xam'. This directory must be
 located in the same directory as the xaaes.km binary.
 The module framework is far from 'settled' yet, and very experimental.
  
  XAD - XaAesDevice modules
  
  This type has extension 'xad' and means XaAesDevice. These are device
 drivers that must be loaded before XaAES starts its helpthreads. XaAES
 thus loads these kinds of modules before all its core functions and
 threads are started, since these may depend on xad functionality being
 present.
  Right now there is only one such driver, moose.xad and moose_w.xad.
  This means the previous .adi drivers are obsolete. Also the 'adi'
  directory under 'src.km' in the sourcethree have changed name to 'xad'.

  XAM - XaAes Module
  
  This type has extension 'xam' and is more like an AES extension.
 These kinds of modules can count on XaAES's systems being fully
 operational, therefore XaAES loads these modules after all
 subsystems are up and running. The goal is to have XaAES load/unload
 these kinds of modules on demand, but now they are loaded when XaAES
 starts and unloaded when XaAES quits.
  Currently there are xam modules that handle resolution changes for
 Videl, Nova and Milan VDI's. There is a new directory in the sourcetree,
 under src.km, called 'xam' where such modulesource are found.

  So, in order to test this version of XaAES the following changes have
 to be made;

  In your xaaes directory (where xaaes.km resides), you create a new
 directory called 'xam'. Into this directory you must copy the XaAES
 modules you intend to use. Either moose.xad or moose_w.xad MUST be
 located here.
 
  Changing resolution have been taken out of the XaAES kernel and put
 into own adm modules. You will find these under xaaes/src.km/xam/rezchg
 in the sourcetree. As of now you must build these and place them
 (or the one you want) in the 'adm' directory. There are currently 
 resolution change modules for Videl, Nova and Milan.
 
 
  Odd Skancke
  