LANCE, RIEBLMST, RIEBLSPC, RIEBLTT, RIEBLSTE (C) 1995-1999 by T. Lang

LANCE.XIF:		For PAM's Net VME (TT) and MEGA ST boards
PAMINTRN.XIF:		Just a link to LANCE.XIF
RIEBLMST.XIF:		For unmodified Riebl boards for the MEGA BUS
RIEBLMST_FAST.XIF:	As RIEBLMST.XIF but with fast memory access for
			unaccelerated systems (8MHz, perhaps >8MHz with 68000)
RIEBLSPC.XIF:		As RIEBLMST.XIF but for modified boards
RIEBLSPC_FAST.XIF:	As RIEBLSPC.XIF but with fast memory access for
			unaccelerated systems (8MHz, perhaps >8MHz with 68000)
RIEBLTT.XIF:		For Riebl VME boards in a TT's VME bus
RIEBLSTE.XIF:		For Riebl VME boards in a MEGA STe's VME bus

The driver is based on dummyeth from Kay Roemer, the LANCE code is loosely
based on the code of the TUW software and the TUM software. Most of the code
had to be rewritten for the use with mintnet, so the actual LANCE code is
mainly done by myself and is based on the LANCE documentation from AMD.

Note: The Riebel Card and the TUM board don't have their complete HW address
in a ROM. I don't know if the developers at TU Vienna or TU Munich got some
HW address space from the internic. If anyone has information about that
please let me know. In that case I would use officially assigned addresses
within the driver.

Kay has implemented a method for setting the hw address of a board "manually".
This is neccessary for some boards which don't have their complete hw address
in an NV RAM or a ROM. Please take a look at his documentation to get the
information how the hw address can be set.

PLEASE NOTE: The hw address cannot be set for all boards!

The LANCE driver is quite stable now but there are still some optimizations
to do. 
The first published version (0.0) is based on the code of the TUW
package to which I added LANCE support for PAM's boards. This code was ported
to Kay's dummyeth. The actual driver uses only some definitions and some
initialization code of the TU Wien package. I have completely
rewritten most of the code.

Please note: Some boards have severe design errors. The PAM's Net boards can
send only packets with even sizes. The Riebl Card for the MEGA ST allocates
its ram where TOS versions >2.00 reside so if you want to use these things
together you have to modify your Riebl card by swapping the MEGA BUS address
lines 20 and 21. Furthermore the Riebl MEGA ST boards don't work reliable when
a accelerator board is installed (like the PAK). Receiving works only reliable
when the board's ram is only read bytewide...

DON'T TRY THESE DRIVERS UNLESS YOU ARE ABSOLUTELY SURE WHAT YOU ARE DOING.
I'm not responsible for any crashed harddisk or so.

If you want to know which boards are currently supported please take a look
into "lance.c".

SPECIAL OPTIONS
hwaddr 0x00:0x00:0x36:0x0[24]:0x??:0x??
	This is for Riebl cards only! Riebl cards don't have their 
	address in rom/eeprom but only in battery backed static ram. 
	Unfortunately there are cards without a battery. And even 
	when you own a card with backup battery it may happen that it
	loses its address. The driver will then tell you with a
	"(no valid hw address!)" in its startup message. If so it 
	refuses to go up until you setup a valid address. Note: The 
	first four octets are fixed values for the specific board so 
	the driver checks these and refuses to accept addresses with
	an invalid manufacurer number (that's what the four octets 
	are used for in this case). You will find the address of the 
	card on	a small label somewhere on it. The first part is always 
	00:00:36, the next number is 04 for vme boards and 02 for MEGA 
	bus boards. The last two numbers identify the board itself.
	For safety you may want to create a config file and always do
	a "ifconfig -f <filename>" first before setting up the ip 
	address.
braddr 0x??:0x??:0x??:0x??:0x??:0x??
	This is a quite useless funtion to setup the hw broadcast 
	address. It's quite useless because the broadcast address is 
	always 0xff:0xff:0xff:0xff:0xff:0xff.
debug <level>
	With this option you can set the debug level for the driver. 
	You normally don't need this. <level> is an integer value.
log <filename>
	With this option you can set a filename where to log. You
	normally don't need this. <filename> is a string.

If you have any suggestions, flames, hints or so do not hesitate to contact me.
My address:
Torsten Lang
Bismarckstr. 6
35410 Hungen
EMail: Torsten@Lang.net
